The next part is a video entitled The Inside Story hosted by
Brother Ken Stovall, who also serves as a Theocratic School
instructor.
I am so excited to be with you here again on this segment of
The Inside Story.
This time we're with class number 143 of the Gilead School.
And you are going to meet some adorable brothers and sisters.
And let me tell you, they have some moving experiences to
relate to you.
And we're going to solve two fascinating mysteries.
And we have music.
Students in this class are going to thrill you with their
musical talent.
There is a captivating song that they're going to sing for
you.
So come with me as we together get the Inside Story.
Let's introduce our first guest.
And that would be Sasha Komoromi from the Serbia branch.
So Brother Komoromi, you serve at the Serbia branch.
But you told me that some years ago, before you were in
the truth, you discovered that there were two main interests
you had in life.
One of them had to do with a career choice.
Could you explain that?
One was music.
Music.
Now, is this a picture of you?
That was the old name.
Evidently you were in a band.
Yes, we were at one competition at that time.
That was one of your interests.
But there was another.
What was that?
Searching for purpose of life.
And how did you go about searching for life's purpose?
I read a lot of books, books about parapsychology,
Buddhism, spiritism, Tibetan Lamaism.
Amazing, that's a lot of books.
Now, at the time, though, you were dating your wife, Vicky,
what did she think of all these books?
Did she share your interest in all this reading?
I wish she did, but no, she did not.
To be honest, it's not really easy to like, to read
that kind of books.
For example, the book of the dead, the book of the dead,
that I can see that's not going to be a very enjoyable book.
Now, was it only books?
Is that the only way you were searching for the purpose of life?
No, I was also experimented with different states of mind
under influences of drugs during my hallucinations.
I had many things already solved out.
You had everything solved.
This is what I thought.
But after I come to myself again
and I'm again in the same room and everything is the same.
So I was really, really disappointed.
And then I prayed to God.
I said, God, I'm asking just for one thing.
Whatever it is, just please help me to be certain
that I find the truth.
Very interesting.
So you prayed for Jehovah to help you find the truth.
Of course, you didn't know Jehovah at the time.
So how was your prayer answered?
As soon after that, I went to Germany.
I had the idea to form my music studio.
During my visit there, I understood that my uncle
and my aunt, David Jehovah's Witnesses.
And you never knew that before?
No, no, I didn't know.
So what did they have in their home
that would have been really exciting to you?
As all Jehovah's Witnesses,
they had a lot of telecratic books.
So did you read the books?
Yes, I read them a lot.
Actually, I read the book daily.
Wow.
So you get back home, you open up the suitcases
and Vicki's there and she sees books.
And you were supposed to bring home musical equipment.
What did she think about that?
She thought, now definitely she's totally crazy.
So what did you do?
I explained very immediately that from now on
I would like to leave according to what they read
in these books and the Bible.
And I also would like for her that she also
leave like that.
If this is okay with her, we can say together
if it is not okay with her, we are finished.
You like to be direct, don't you?
I know, I was very tactful.
But I also offered her a book, Young People Ask.
Did she like that?
Yes, she liked that much more than my ultimate.
I see.
We start studying the Bible.
At the beginning my wife, she started because of me.
But later she done this because of her.
And after six months, we became unbaptized publishers.
Then we get married and we were baptized at 1994.
Immediately we start with full-time service
and we served five years as regular pioneers.
Then almost five years as special pioneers
and now we are 13 years in the Serbia branch.
Jehovah has answered your prayer, you're satisfied.
You found the truth.
You found the purpose in life.
But there's still the music.
Did you have to give up your desire to play music,
to be involved in music, especially since you've come to Bethel now?
Actually, in 2013 there was one idea
that we should start with project recording vocal rendition
of our teocratic songs.
And my wife Violeta and I had privileged to participate
in that project.
Now, was this just for the Serbia branch?
No.
Plan was to record the songs in four or five languages.
Four or five languages.
Would this mean that you would travel around
into the different countries surrounding Serbia?
No.
Ideas was that singers will come from other countries to Serbia
and they will be full-time singers
for a period of time until we finish that project.
That must have been a tremendous amount of work.
How did you get that accomplished?
Yeah, it's easier if we see one video
and it will be much more understandable.
All right.
Good.
Let's watch the video.
One of the first things we needed was a recording studio.
So with the help of many, we built our own.
A typical day began with a little music theory,
a little stretching,
and a brief review of the song's scriptural theme.
Once they received a new song,
they practiced in separate groups.
Then they would all come together.
Finally, it was time to record.
This resulted in 450 songs being recorded
in a period of 22 months.
Looking back,
these songs were sung not just with words,
but with hearts full of love for Jehovah.
Look at them.
They were nice readings at the end.
My surprise.
I loved the way the chorus sounded.
You did a good job with them.
That must have been a tremendous amount of work.
Getting that all done though,
in five different languages.
Yes, singers, they done a great job
and also old crew.
And we really could see all the times
they are in love for Jehovah,
love for brotherhood.
And every day,
we can see a lot of self-sacrificing spirit.
Now, Sasha, let me ask you one more question.
We saw the picture there of you as a musician.
And I know you have some musical talent.
Possibly you could have become famous.
Do you ever regret not pursuing some sort of a career
in the world as opposed to giving your life
in full-time service?
Did you, Jehovah?
As you said,
I could be famous or I could become a drug addict
and now dead.
That's a good voice.
But no, no regrets at all.
I received much, much more that I ever imagined.
And in my case, from my first prayer,
till now, Jehovah ensured me
that he's really here of prayers,
as Solomon mentioned in Psalm 65 verse two.
Excellent, thank you so much, Sasha,
for sharing these very heartfelt comments.
And thank you.
Now, you know what we're going to do?
We're going to give you opportunity
to get to know some of the students in our audience.
We're going to do an activity I call
what's my favorite scripture?
So we're going to ask the students
if they'll volunteer and give us their favorite scripture.
And in a minute or less,
tell us what it says and why it's their favorite scripture.
Okay.
Let's see now.
Who would like to go first?
Shingurai Mapfumo from Zimbabwe.
Psalm 84 verse 11.
And what does that say?
For Jehovah God is a sun and a shield.
He gives favor and glory.
Jehovah will not hold back anything good
from those walking in integrity.
Okay, so tell us.
Why is that your favorite scripture?
During the economic crisis in Zimbabwe,
my partner, Patna and I ran out of food.
We were really starving.
And physically, we were so weak
that we could not even function.
Still, we managed to go to town
hoping that we could get some money from the bank.
There was a long queue.
And the bank was not giving any money either.
We were so distraught.
At that moment, when we didn't know what to do,
a truck from the branch office
brought food supplies for us,
then it became so clear to me
that Jehovah is a shield
and he never holds back anything good
from his loyal servants.
Amazing.
Well, I can see why that's your favorite scripture.
All right, who else?
Let's get sister.
It's a Peng Mushongo.
And she's from South Africa.
My favorite scripture is Psalm 68 verse 5.
And it says about Jehovah.
He is the father of the fatherless
and a protector of leaders.
Why is that your favorite scripture?
Well, I became motherless
when I was only one year old.
But Jehovah has provided me
with hundreds of mothers around the globe,
both black and white.
And because a battle work
involves traveling all around the African continent,
working with the translators,
it makes it even more precious to me
that I adopt this family wherever we go.
Truly, Jehovah has proved to be my father
and my protector to this day.
Very touching.
And I'm sure that all of those parents
that have adopted you are proud to have you as a daughter.
Who else could tell us their favorite scripture?
All right, let's get brother Sylvain Bois from Benin.
It is Psalm 94 verse 18 and 19.
And what does it say?
Your loyal love,
O Jehovah, kept supporting me.
When anxieties overwhelm me,
you comforted and soothed me.
So tell us,
why is that scripture special to you?
Years ago,
when I was attending Minnesota training school,
I had a serious stroke
and I was hospitalized.
When I woke from coma,
I felt very happy because I was alive
but also very discouraged.
Because I thought everything was over for me.
Pioneer service, school,
and even my dream to become one day a missionary.
But one of the instructor and his wife
came to the hospital
and they read me that verse.
And my heart was full of anxieties
but that really felt that day
that Jehovah was able to comfort me and soothed me.
And you know what,
one year later,
I was permitted to attend again, MTS.
And few months later,
Jehovah fulfilled another of my dream
as I've been assigned as a missionary in Africa.
Brother Bois,
that was very touching.
Thank you so much.
And we're so glad to have you in this class of Gileon.
Well, that's all we're going to have time for.
So now it's time to introduce our next guest.
And that would be Brother Paulo Magaña
and he's from Brazil.
Now, Brother Magaña, you're at the Brazil branch
but you came in the truth at nine years old
at the same time as your mother.
And you went to the branch,
then to Bethel in your early 20s.
And you've been there for 27 years.
What department do you work in at the branch now?
I am now in LDC for one and a half years.
LDC.
Okay, would you just tell us
what does the LDC department do?
LDC is the local and design construction department.
It's responsible for the work of planning,
construction, and maintenance of Kingdom Halls
and assembly halls.
You have the LDC department there in Bethel.
But who outside of Bethel works with
building Kingdom Halls assembly halls?
Outside, we have many brothers and sisters
serving as construction servants,
construction volunteers,
remote volunteers, and field representatives.
Now, this is the mystery.
This is our first mystery.
What really then does a field representative do?
Okay, let's call them just field reps, okay?
Okay, field reps.
I like that.
You used to say that they are the eyes
and the ears of the LDC at the branch.
But what if I show you some pictures?
I got the work.
I would love that.
Okay, at the first step,
the officer asks his hand to investigate
some congregation needs.
He meets with the local elders,
the secret overseer, to determine the needs.
And later, he sends a recommendation to the officer.
I see, so if he has a large region,
he may have to have many, many of these meetings
and do a lot of research to determine
what the needs are for Kingdom Halls.
Once the project is approved,
the next step is to search for appropriate land,
a property.
To do that, he goes to the internet,
consults real estate agents,
local brothers, neighbors, find a right property
at the right cost,
can be very time consuming,
and requires for him a lot of his cues and abilities.
In the field reps is also responsible
for getting the permits,
the approvals for construction.
And he visits several different agencies every day
to get the permits,
to have everything approved by the government.
In big cities, he may have to stand in line,
after line, after line,
this could take.
And in big cities,
it can take even some weeks,
some months, to get everything approved.
Finally, when everything is approved,
the construction group starts the work.
And you can see him again visiting to the site
in order to give some technical support
for the construction over here.
So now does he stay on the site
when a building is being built?
No, he turns to his office,
but remains in contact with the group
to give some remote support.
Especially when some big issues arise at the site,
the construction over here
always can count on his good support.
Okay, good.
I noticed in this picture,
behind the field representative,
we see a sister picture there.
Who might that be?
Well, if he's married,
his wife can do lots to work to help him.
But he's not.
He can count with a local volunteer to help him.
Once the project is concluded,
he visits the site again,
now to do the commissioning
and to make sure that everything was done
according to the plans.
So evidently, his job is done now.
No, not yet.
He's also responsible for giving training
for local brothers to properly maintain the building.
Wow.
So you have helped solve this mystery.
He does have a lot of work to do.
But does really working on one project
keep him busy?
No, it is not just Wembers to vote.
They are very busy and productive workers.
In average, each field rep
can work on 10 to 15 projects
in different phases,
but at the same time.
My goodness, that's amazing.
They really do an amazing amount of work.
Paulo, I understand that at your branch,
you've come up with a very innovative idea
regarding assembly halls and kingdom halls.
Could you explain that to us?
Yes, we'll have it done.
It's called an expandable kingdom hall.
Expandable kingdom hall.
Sasha, do you have expandable kingdom halls in Serbia?
No, the time will go.
I can't even imagine how do you expand the kingdom hall.
Okay, what if we see a brief video about this?
Okay, I'd like that.
At first, it looks like a normal kingdom hall.
But something wonderful happens
when the back walls are lifted.
It's now large enough to hold an entire assembly
or convention.
But before we can meet there,
it has to be cleaned.
Chairs are rented and arranged.
And all during video equipment must be set up
so that no matter where you sit,
you won't miss anything.
All the hard work is worth it
when you see how much the friends benefit.
When the special weekend of activities over
and the walls are lowered,
it goes right back to being a kingdom hall again.
That's our family there.
Yeah, they sent you some spirited greetings.
And what a brilliant way to get the most out of a building
and save money.
Now, Brother Magania, I just want to ask you,
what has impressed you the most
about working with the LDC department?
What really touched my heart
is to see the spirit of willingness to help
show it by all those involved with the LDC.
You know, these brothers and sisters
have left their families, their halls, their friends behind
to work with these projects.
All these sacrifices are done out of love.
Love for our brotherhood
and especially love for Jehovah.
That's the reason what I really,
I really appreciate their work.
Thank you, Brother Magania.
Obviously, those brothers and sisters
that work with LDC set a good example for the rest of us.
Thank you very much.
My pleasure.
Now, Brother Tomoromi,
it's time for you to give us a sample
of your musical talent.
Would you go and join our band?
Recently, the governing body has given us
loving encouragement
through our regional convention program
to never give up.
Now, the Gilead students
have written a song
that goes right along with that spirit and that theme.
It's entitled,
We'll Never Let Go.
I thought that was a thrilling song.
You brothers and sisters
did a marvelous job on that.
And you know what I liked about the song too?
It's that it gets progressively more modern
as it goes through the song.
So it really says to me that our organization
in its modern day history,
even in early times has never given up
and we will never give up.
And it's so joyful.
It says that we're going to endure with joy.
No one can take that away from us.
It's Jehovah's gift through his Holy Spirit.
Now, it's time to introduce our final guest
and that is Sister Angela Kang from the United States.
Angela, you are one of the single sisters in our class,
but where in the United States do you serve?
I met the remote translation office
in Sacramento, California
and they translate into the Hmong language there.
Now, I have to confess the Hmong language.
I never knew until very recently
that there was such a language as the Hmong language.
And I didn't realize there was a Hmong people.
Why is that?
Well, for a long time,
the Hmong story was kept a secret from the American public.
Now, this is another one of our mysteries
because why would it be
that someone would try to keep the existence
of a whole culture secret?
Well, during the Vietnam War,
it was a very unpopular conflict.
And so the many US citizens,
they didn't want the war to expand.
So the US government actually went to Southeast Asia
and they secretly recruited the Hmong men
who were living in the hill trebs of loss
to fight communism in that part of the world.
In the end, about 40,000 Hmong men were killed and not worked.
And so that's about one in four Hmong men.
So every family lost someone.
40,000 men.
I don't think that people really are aware of that fact.
Are they?
No, I'm many historians.
They call that conflict the secret war.
Looking at our monitor here,
what is it we're seeing here?
This was an exhibit showcasing the Hmong experience,
how they came to the US.
And it's a wall of unknown soldiers who fought in the war.
And they were asking the Hmong community
to identify their loved ones.
So if you and our congregation knew some of those men.
I see.
Now, as I think back to the history of that war,
at some point in time,
the United States pulled out a Vietnam.
So what happened then to the Hmong
that were left there in Vietnam
when the US pulled out?
It was a desperate situation
because there was an aggressive campaign
to capture and kill any of the remaining Hmong families.
And so many of them had to find a way to escape.
And so we see that here in this photo.
This is Long Chiang Air Base in 1975.
About 30,000 Hmong people
converge on that airport hoping to find a way out.
But only about 2,500 were airlifted.
The more prominent officials.
I see.
You can see that those thousands of people there
are not going to fit on that airplane.
So all these thousands that were left behind,
what happened to them?
They were pretty much left on their own.
And they had to find their way out,
along with thousands of other families.
And so that's what happened to my family.
They found their way across the Meacon River
into Thailand and they were placed in refugee camps.
I see.
So who are we seeing a picture of here now on the monitor?
This is my father in the Thailand refugee camp
and my mother, my grandmother, and my uncle.
Now, so your family managed to survive
by fleeing into Thailand and getting into the refugee camp.
But then how did they get to the United States?
In 1979, they were sponsored to the United States.
And the culture is patriarchal.
So you stick close with your clan.
And so my entire clan ended up in California
and they settled in South Sacramento.
I can imagine that this experience
must have been a tremendous amount of loss
for among people, among families.
My father, he lost his mother.
When they were fleeing, he lost his brother.
He saw many people lose their lives.
Many clans were separated.
Some of their relatives ended up in France
and the rest of them ended up in the United States.
And then when they settled here,
my mom, she lost her hearing.
So it was just an added stress in their lives.
So how did all this suffering and loss,
how did it affect your mother?
Even though her background is animous,
she knew that the Bible was a holy book
that would teach her about the creator.
So she found comfort in reading the Bible.
And she started to collect different Bibles
from different translations
and comparing them to try to understand
what she was reading.
And every night, she would pray with me and my sister.
And so from a young age,
we were taught that God is real,
even though we didn't know Jehovah yet.
Wow, very, very interesting.
So she was really, really looking for the truth.
So how did she eventually find the truth?
Well, in the meantime, my uncle,
the one who was pictured earlier,
he and his wife started studying the Bible
and they came into the truth.
And they asked his sister to come study with my mom
and soon my entire family was studying.
In 1996, my mom was baptized
in 1997, me and my sister were baptized.
Amazing. So now you were baptized at the age of 12.
And then you started pioneering at the age of 15.
Yes.
Now, first of all, you were in an English congregation.
But what changed that?
Our secret overseer, he came through
and he was telling us about a Hmong group
that had formed in our sister congregation.
And he told us we had no reason to be in English.
And he was right.
So as a family, we moved over to the Hmong group.
And in 1999, that group became the very first Hmong congregation.
So that made us very happy.
So you were associated with the very first Hmong congregation
anywhere in the world.
Amazing.
Now later, you toured Bethel.
And that had a profound effect on you.
Can you tell us about that?
Well, we came to Bethel
and a brother in Transition Services.
He found out we were coming through
so he wanted to meet with us.
And he sat us girls down and he told us,
you have something you can give to Jehovah.
And that's your language.
So it really got me thinking about what I could do
to really support the field.
So I went home and I really worked on my language
and worked on supporting the group.
And in 2007, when Bethel came looking for translators,
this same brother came out and he interviewed a group of us.
And shortly after that, me, my mom and another brother
were invited to serve on the Hmong Transition team
at the first RTO here in the US branch.
My goodness.
So the first Hmong congregation anywhere in the world
and the first RTO for the US branch.
Jehovah certainly has blessed you
with some wonderful privileges.
Could you just tell us what's it like working at the RTO
from day to day?
Sure.
Would you like to see a video?
Yes, we would.
At the Hmong RTO, many hands help in the Transition War.
When questions come up, we're not left on our own.
The Transition Services Department
is always ready to provide support.
Once everything is approved, it's time to record it.
Since Hmong wasn't a written language into the 1950s,
audio publications are very important to the Hmong feel.
Some support the RTO and other valuable ways too,
such as cooking and cleaning.
It's the best feeling to talk to the Hmong people
and to show them something in their language.
You can see how it touches their heart.
As a result, we have many interested ones
attend our meetings.
As the Hmong feel continues to grow,
many are learning our language
to help support the preaching work.
When we get together, we have a great time.
With good food, association, watching the kids play,
it's obvious to everyone in the community
that we're not just a congregation, we're a family.
That was a wonderful video, really.
Angela, could you just tell us,
why does the work done at the RTO feel such a great need
among the Hmong people?
Well, the Hmong are people without a country.
And throughout history, they've been pushed from one location
to another.
They were pushed out of China in the late 1800s.
They were pushed out of Laos.
And from there, they were scattered across the world
to the US, to France, to Australia.
And to so many of the Hmong brothers,
they feel like a forgotten people.
What does this feel like to the first time I've heard of?
It's the first time she's seen a video, so it's moving.
So many of the Hmong brothers,
they feel like a forgotten people.
But the work at the RTO is a reminder
that Jehovah hasn't forgotten them.
In fact, he invites them to become
part of an international clan of Brotherhood.
And when they respond to that invitation,
they find something that they've been looking for all along.
They finally find a place, a permanent home,
under God's Kingdom.
Thank you for those heartfelt comments.
Really, those are very nice.
Now, Sister Kang, we have a little surprise for you.
We really want the audience to know that
with the work done at the Hmong RTO
is not just for the United States,
but the effect reaches clear around the world.
In fact, we have caught up with the congregation
in Northern Thailand.
And I know this is a surprise.
We did not rehearse this.
No, it's not.
But we're going to show you if you'd like.
Yeah.
Watch this.
Well, obviously, they're grateful for the work
you brothers and sisters do in that RTO.
Wasn't this a thrilling occasion?
It was wonderful, enjoyable, to get to know
these brothers and sisters.
We wish that Jehovah continued to bless you
in your faithful service to him
until the next time we get together on the Inside Story.
Thank you very much, Brother Stovall,
for sharing with us the Inside Story.
We appreciate very much your letting us in on it.
But I have to admit, this is the first
really a graduation I've ever been to,
where I couldn't help but pat my foot back there.
I'm just so glad I was behind the curtain.